# 18.09.2024 (Wed) 20:00 Protocol

Participants: [@ArielMant0](https://github.com/ArielMant0), [@HendrikBrueckler](https://github.com/HendrikBrueckler), [@rwarnking](https://github.com/rwarnking)

## Table of Contents

- Results of our last session
- The contents of the paper
  - Discussing the current state
  - Discussing the reviews
  - Discussing new angles and ideas
- Discuss the list of settings created last time
- How to go on from here

## Results of out last session

To recap the last session we talked about the events and results of the last session. For this we used the summary of the meeting.
As a result of the previous discussion about queues we had a look at the game prison architect to make the differences between direkt and indirekt queues more apparent.

## The contents of the paper

Since the paper deadline is highest priority right now, we need to discuss next steps and how we can improve the contents of the paper.

### Discussing the most important points of the reviews

The most important critical points of the reviewer were:

- the sampling is biased
- the depth of analysis

Regarding the first point we agreed that it would be very difficult to reduce the bias, since this taxonomy is based on user input like which games are tagged and what tags are available.
The only proposition for reducing bias was to validate the taxonomy via third party persons or by validating the tags assigned to a game by testing if external personal would be able to identify a game from a list of games via the list of given tags.
For both cases it needs to be noted, that the initial bias of the game selection can not be removed by this, only its impact on the other components can be investigated.

The plan to solve the second critic was to improve the quality of analysis and obtain more concrete results.
Furthermore one proposition was to give an quantitative overview, meaning how often did something occur (similar to a survey).
For example when discussing how players externalize encodings like pictograms, graphs (red strings) might come to mind. These could be counted and we could make statements like "Of the games that do this, X games also do this.".

Further questions mentioned were:

- How does the externalization relate to visualization?
- How does the externalization relate to interaction?
- Can players themselves build visualizations or externalizations? How do people do that?

### Discussing the current state

The current state of the paper has divided the results into categories similar to the 5 w's of journalism: Why, How, How long, What, ...
This seems to be a good idea, but would need refinement, so this was the origin of our following discussion.

### Discussing how to incorporate externalization tree into the application

We began by discussing whether the externalization questions should be part of the tree. By this the terms mentioned in the paper would be part of the main tree inside of a externalization subtree.
Up until know we used the tag to describe a game and afterwards decided whether a tag is related to an externalization field. Even though this can work, we found that concrete examples might get lost due to the abstraction when using a tag.
Due to the size of the tree it was mentioned that it might be advantageous to add __areas__ to the tree that encapsulate subtrees (for example __problem solving__ or __mechanics__).
Since it was unclear how the result would look like, we temporarily opted for collapsible subtrees.

Following this we further discussed how the externalization tree from the paper could be included in the taxonomy tree.
Here it was especially difficult to find a nice way to incorporate this tree in the current tagging workflow.
Specifically the problem mentioned was the disconnect between tagging a game in general and keeping the externalization subtree in mind.
Furthermore the different abstraction layers and repetition of the main tree and the externalization subtree could also make the usability difficult.
Instead it was proposed to indicate the user when tagging a potentially externalization realted tag, to also check if there actually is a connection to externalization.
Similar to the tool giving you a hint or an alert that there might be a connection.

Since this was still not a satisfying solution we iterated the tagging process in detail to find an appropriate way.
We began by clarifying that the first step would be to choose a tag from each subtree of the externalization tree.
This already revealed a problem, since the user might want to mark multiple externalizations for one game, which could lead all tags of the externalization tree selected.
This lead to our final result:
The user can add an externalization event to a game. Here the user can add a description, description tags and evidence as well as tags from the externalization tree.
This has the advantage of an 1:1 assignment of evidence and externalization tags to an externalization event.
Furthermore this allows to save which description tags were already part of an externalization, allowing to ask the user when tagging a specific tag, whether he thinks the tag might also be related to an externalization.

### Discussing adjustments to externalization tree

Afterwards we discussed the selection of externalization tags mentioned in the paper. For this we talked about which tags should be added, removed or merged.

Changes that were made:

- why and when were merged, or when was deleted
  - sense making was replaced by analysis und information foraging
- how was changed to incorporate interaction and (visual) encodings
  - how am I doing something
  - how does that look like
- what: we refined the descriptive information part
  - use common data property (ordinal) or encodings
  - example: [Dota 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/570/Dota_2/) text chat (natural language), pings

The final structure:

- Why
  - information gathering/foreaging
  - analysis
  - provenance
- What
  - visual interaction
  - intent - useful for planning und communication
  - stating information
    - judgement/sentiment/endorcement
    - descriptive information ([Dota 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/570/Dota_2/) pinging mana)
    - factual information (wahrheitswert?)
    - relation information
    - spatial relation information
- How (do I do something) (replace)
  - interaction
  - (visual) encodings
  - edit, modify?
- How long
  - long lasting
  - reusable
  - persistent
  - immortal
  - transient (immediate use)
  - three categories
  - removable?

### What is externalization in general?
Externalization is when the player represents something in any modality by interacting with the game.
It does not matter whether it is visual or for example audio, even though visual might be more interesting, but it should be consumable (example would be voice chat).

Especially the lifetime of an externalization might be interesting.
Is it persistent and therefore accessible for ever or does it expire after a certain amount of time,
or does it maybe expire based on an user interaction for example when a goal is reached or a barrier is overcome.
Varying context therefore might provide different tools or might erase previous information. This contrasts information that is persistent across a session e.g. text chats while pings usually are only visible for a short time period.
Here it is important to note that the lifetime is given by the game - a sign in [Minecraft](https://www.minecraft.net/en-us) can be replaced or removed by the player, but the game does not delete such information on its own.

Generally it can be said, that the results of this categorization should be highly dependent on the freedom and the tools provided by the game.

## How to go on from here

We discussed the time schedule and adjusted it according to the possibilities. This included the timeframes of the next phases as well as when potentially programming might happen.
Additionally we decided to clean the tree such that it can be used in phase 5. These changes could then be discussed again in phase 6 in case they should be reverted.

start | end | Phase | Description | Task
------|-----|-------|-------------|------
now | 14.10 (Mo) | 4 | Discuss tree and rework and refine on demand | Implementation
15.10 (Tue) | 21.10 (Mo) | 5 | Tagging Phase | Implementation
22.10 (Tue) | 05.11 (Mo) | 6 | Discuss tree and rework and refine on demand | Paper Writing
05.11 (Tue) | 18.11 (Mo) | 7 | Tagging Phase | Paper Writing
19.11 (Tue) | 23.11 (Sa) | 8 | Discuss tree and rework and refine on demand | Paper Writing

### Deadlines

Date | Description
------|-----
23.11.2024 23:59 (Sa) | Abstract Deadline
30.11.2024 23:59 (Sa) | Full Paper Deadline

## Discuss how the list of settings created last time

Since we were not able to assign or differentiate between topics and themes even though we had the terms visually represented. We focused on differentiating settings from topics and themes. In the hopes that we would lose nothing of value when merging topics and themes.

We began by assigning all terms to the four categories settings, topics, themes and motifs.
Afterwards we were able to create three subcategories of the settings: time, location and genre. While genre is still unclear whether the term is the best to represent it.

Generally we defined that if a term can be a setting it is a setting otherwise it is a topic.
One could say that every setting is a topic, but not every topic is a setting
and therefore everything that is not a setting will be a topic.

In the final tree the goal would be, that the user chooses one from each category (time, location and genre) resulting in a combination that would portray the setting.
In contrast to that the absence of any tag would clearly indicate special cases.

Finally we used definitions of the terms motif and theme to aid us in distinction of the terms and divided the topics/themes category into multiple subcategories.
Especially this step made it more easy to group tags into the categories.

- motifs in literary texts are essentially repeated patterns of language, sounds, images, symbols and or concepts
- a literary theme is the main idea or underlying meaning a writer explores in a novel, short story or other literary work

### Final result

#### Settings

 time        | location   | genre?
-------------|------------|--------
medival      | nature     | post apocalypse
future       | urban      | zombie apocalypse
futuristic   | space      | science fiction
modern times | space ship | fantasy
&nbsp;       | America    | space western
&nbsp;       | &nbsp;     | horror
&nbsp;       | &nbsp;     | crime
&nbsp;       | &nbsp;     | adventure
&nbsp;       | &nbsp;     | ~~simulation realism~~

#### Topics/Themes

ethics, culture & society   | forms of life       | conflict              | supernatural phenomena | metaphysics
----------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|-------------
racism?                     | non human lifeforms | violence              | time travel            | ?
AI sentience                | god(s)?             | armed conflict        | magic                  |
religion                    | dragon              | political conflict    | &nbsp;                 |
brainwashing                | monsters?           | race conflicts        | &nbsp;                 |
colonialization             | creatures?          | interspecies conflict | &nbsp;                 |
sexism?                     | ecosystems          | war                   | &nbsp;                 |
race?                       | synthetic life      | seizing power         | &nbsp;                 |
civilization                | aliens              | &nbsp;                | &nbsp;                 |
family                      | (extinction)        | &nbsp;                | &nbsp;                 |
interpersonal relationships | &nbsp;              | &nbsp;                | &nbsp;                 |
mindcontrol?                | &nbsp;              | &nbsp;                | &nbsp;                 |
independence                | &nbsp;              | &nbsp;                | &nbsp;                 |

#### Remaining

. | tags
--|--
this is what characters do | competition, survival, treasure hunting, space travel, fishing, hard labor, mining
emotions | grossness, happyness, fear, grief, sadness
stilmittel | gore, humor, jump scares
motifs | the chosen one
plot-narrative | herostory

There were still problems when assigning tags to the genre category. Especially when talking about _survival_ (this is what characters do) and _simulation realism_.
