# 12.05. Meeting Notes (Sun) (Phase 4)

Next Meeting: 22.05.2024 (Wed), 20:00-00:00 (Tree Phase)

Participants: [@ArielMant0](https://github.com/ArielMant0), [@HendrikBrueckler](https://github.com/HendrikBrueckler), [@rwarnking](https://github.com/rwarnking)

## Topic 4: How to proceed with the tag-tree topics?

#### Explanation

Since the topic-tree does contain a lot of tags that can hardly be understood as being related to topics it is necessary to rework this subtree.

#### Option 1

Remove *topics*, *possibilities* and *solution space* from *problem types*.
Reframe *moral and emotional challenges* as a *problem type*.

#### Option 2

Rework all topics such that they can be leaf-tags from the already defined *problem types* like *game of skill and dexterity*, *logic challenges* and other.

#### Solution

For the time being we opted for option 1. To accomplish this we defined and refined a sentence that can be used as guidance on how to use the tags.

**Version 1**
*“The game has the themes \[themes\] and poses a \[problem type\] problem that the player needs to solve. For this the player can use these \[problem solving techniques\].”*

**Version 2**
The game Das Spiel kombiniert Elemente aus \[Themes/Topic/Genre\], stellt den Spieler vor ein \[problem types\] Problem, die der Spieler mithilfe von \[problem solving techniques\] lösen kann. Dabei nutzt das Spiel folgende Spielmechaniken \[meta mechanics\].

**Version 3**
Das Spiel kombiniert Elemente aus \[Themes/Topic/Genre\]. Der Spieler muss im Laufe des Spiels \[problem types\] Herausforderungen überwinden. Innerhalb des Spiels macht der Spieler konkret folgendes: \[problem solving techniques\]. Dabei nutzt das Spiel folgende Spielmechaniken \[meta mechanics\].

Besides the problem type another tag category (Themes/Topic/Genre/Settings) was introduced, allowing to group a lot of tags that for now are not clearly defined but might be useful in the future. This includes for example tags like, sport, fantasy, detective work and others.
The currently chosen problem types are:
**skill, ethics, logic, strategy, labor/diligence/busywork, challenge less**

## Topic 5: Should we tag the goal of a game?

#### Explanation

Each game has a goal that the player should reach, for example the end of a storyline or to beat all levels. Tagging these would provide a direct representation of why the player might play the game or how the game motivates the player to continue playing.

#### Solution

For the moment we define the goal of a game as a game element that the game itself urges you to complete. For this it does not matter whether the outcome is good or bad. Possible options for this are:

* win match
* beat final level
* get high score / survive as long as possible
* solve big level/puzzle/riddle
* Reach end of storyline/bring story to end/follow storyline/participate
* complete game
* no explicit goal

In general it is fine for a game to have assigned multiple tags of these, but this would need to be connected to varying gamemodes ([Minecraft](https://www.minecraft.net/de-de)).

## Topic 6: USK Tag and similar

* ~~Add a USK tag or something similar.~~
