# 12.06. Meeting Notes (Phase 4)

Next Meeting: 10.07.2024 (Wed), 21:00-00:00 (Tree Phase)

Participants: [@ArielMant0](https://github.com/ArielMant0), [@HendrikBrueckler](https://github.com/HendrikBrueckler), [@rwarnking](https://github.com/rwarnking)

## Topic 5: Should we tag the goal of a game?

### Explanation

We continued talking about tags that are connected to cyclic gameplay. Using a table with the different tags and which games would be tagged with, we were able to discuss in detail and find problems in definition or assignment. The replayability tag should in general indicate why a player would be interested in playing a game a second time – Why would the player want that and what changes such that that might be interesting?

### Results

##### *Removed tags*

* cyclic: We came to the conclusion that games which would be tagged with cyclic must be represented via a combination of other tags, since defining what exactly cyclic means and how one can differentiate it from other tags is difficult. Therefore tags like randomness should be used to indicate that there might be an incentive to repeatedly play the game.
* completionist: This tag was removed since it is player specific and can be assigned to every game. A game does not provide a concrete mechanic such that the player will play it to its limit. This is something a player would decide on their own. Furthermore, defining when something is completionist behavior is difficult when it is not possible to clearly state what content requires completionist behavior to be played.
* new content: This tag was removed, since it overlaps with unlock content and is therefore redundant.

##### *Moved tags*

- new game+: Similar to cyclic we decided for new game+ not to be part of the replayability tree and instead add it as a meta mechanic. This allows the user to indicate that the game itself calls it new game+ while the tag itself does not provide an explanation of what this really means in form of gameplay or game content.
- backtracking: We defined backtracking but did not yet decide to which subtree it should finally belong – but we agreed that it is not related to replayability.
  [https://www.giantbomb.com/backtracking/3015-239/](https://www.giantbomb.com/backtracking/3015-239/)
- open end: This tag is also not finally assigned a subtree but will most likely be part of the structure tree. A definition is still pending.

|  | Tetris | Dota | Diablo | Hades | WoW | Border lands | Stanley Parable | FTL | Anno | Arkham City | Antichamber | Super hot | Super Meat Boy | Portal |
| :---- | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| new game \+ |  |  |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |  |  |
| backtracking |  |  | ✖️ | ❔ | ✖️ | ❔ |  |  |  | ❔ | ✖️ |  |  |  |
| open end |  |  | ✖️ | ✖️ | ✖️ |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |  |  |  |

##### *Randomness tag rework*

The importance of this tag increased due to the introduction of the replayability tree since it can be a strong incentive to play a game again (because of variety) while in some games being only an unimportant feature for minor details. Given this we discussed multiple options to emphasize the importance of randomness in a game for example by adding a minor and major classifier. Finally we settled for a new subtree that could contain tags like:

* random world generation
  * random starting conditions??? (No Man's Sky)
  * random spawn (Minecraft)
* random (drops) loot
* random enemies / units / characters
* random ability selection (mosalina)
  * random card game drawing
* random ability outcomes

Unfortunately this opened up a new problem since it is difficult to decide whether this subtree should be part of replayability since it might as well be a subtree for another tag. Further discussion revealed an overlap with procedural generation (non handmade content), this allowed us for the moment to add the randomness as a replayability subtree while representing specific randomness components in the meta mechanics. This was especially related to games like No Man's Sky, where a game component is generated randomly once at game start but not during the game itself. One idea was to only tag replayability randomness if game components change at the beginning of the game – this proposal was discarded until further discussion, since random components during the game are a vital part of replayability. Finally it was proposed to add a difficulty scaling tag to the meta progression tree.

##### *Replayability Tags*

Further discussion about the replayability tree led to the following tags besides randomness.

|  | Tetris | Dota | Diablo | Hades | WoW | Border lands | Stanley Parable | FTL | Anno | Arkham City | Antichamber | Super hot | Super Meat Boy | Portal |
| :---- | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| narrative branches |  |  |  |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| gameplay branches | ❔ | ❔ | ❔ | ❔ | ❔ | ❔ | ✖️ |  |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |
| unlock content |  |  | ✖️❔ |  |  | ✖️❔ |  | ✖️ |  | ✖️ |  |  | ✖️ |  |
| unlock narrative |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| meta progression |  | ✖️❔ |  |  |  |  | ✖️ | ✖️❔ |  |  |  | ✖️❔ | ✖️❔ |  |
| match based | ✖️ | ✖️ |  |  |  |  |  |  | ✖️ |  |  |  |  |  |

On top of these we discussed in detail the differences between new game+ modi and other games like FTL in which the player plays a similar portion of the game over and over again (cyclic). Here it is apparent that randomness plays an important role in the player replaying the game. But we also found that the duration of a playthrough highly influences the impact of randomness and therefore of the replayability. This can have various characteristics, for example a game that was only played 5 hours might still contain content that the player did not see and that is new, original and exciting – while a longer game might use all its resources in one playthrough even if further playthroughs change specific values like health points or similar. (Borderlands). This all can be seen as part of the level of suspense or fun which might decrease over time and might impact the players readiness to start a second round. In conclusion we opted to add two tags, one for games with a short cycle (\<5h) and one for games with a long cycle (\>5h). Still unclear are games that also have an open ended cycle.

##### *Further Definitions*

| new game+ | MOVED TO META MECHANICS |
| :---- | :---- |
| **narrative branches** |  |
| **gameplay branches** |  |
| **randomness** | ADD SUBTREE |
| **unlock content /gameplay** | Gameplay elements that are incrementally added to the game between subsequent playthroughs, such as Items/Abilities/Enemies/Areas/Maps/Cosmetics etc. Explicitly not for difficulty scaling, random elements that are not specific to the current playthrough,  |
| **unlock narrative** | pls merge into content or rename content to gameplay (elements) :) |
| **meta progression** |  |
| **completionist** |  |
| **match based** |  |
| **backtracking** | Backtracking is the act of navigating through previously explored areas, usually for the purpose of progressing in an objective-based adventure game. |
| **open end** |  |

##### *Open Questions:*

- Should replayability be renamed or split?
- Define meta progression\!
  - tangible meta progression
  - [https://store.steampowered.com/app/609490/Minit/](https://store.steampowered.com/app/609490/Minit/)
- Why would someone replay Vectronom?
  - How to indicate players replaying one part of the game (Super Meat Boy)?
  - settings for BPM
  - Highscores
- Merge unlock content and unlock narrative\! But what about game modi that can be unlocked, like new game+? When is something unlock content?
  - Subtree for unlock content?
  - unlock gamemode?
  - higher difficulty → difficulty scaling (tag in meta mechanic)

