# 12.08.2024 (Mon) Meeting Protocol (Phase 4: Tree)

Next Meeting: 18.09.2024 (Wed), 21:00-00:00 (Phase 4: Tree)

Participants: [@ArielMant0](https://github.com/ArielMant0), [@HendrikBrueckler](https://github.com/HendrikBrueckler), [@rwarnking](https://github.com/rwarnking)

## Table of Contents

- General Timetable
- Issue #51: Discuss tagging USK - remove tag _usk 18_ from tree?
- Issue #49: Create subtree setting
- Issue #35: Refine subtree organize information
- Issue #25: Rework subtree queue

## General Timetable

start | end | Phase | Description | Task
------|-----|-------|-------------|------
now | 14.10 (Mo) | 4 | Discuss tree and rework and refine on demand | Implementation
15.10 (Tue) | 21.10 (Mo) | 5 | Tagging Phase | Implementation
22.10 (Tue) | 05.11 (Mo) | 6 | Discuss tree and rework and refine on demand | Paper Writing
05.11 (Tue) | 18.11 (Mo) | 7 | Tagging Phase | Paper Writing
19.11 (Tue) | 23.11 (Sa) | 8 | Discuss tree and rework and refine on demand | Paper Writing

Deadlines
Date | Description
------|-----
23.11.2024 23:59 (Sa) | Abstract Deadline
30.11.2024 23:59 (Sa) | Full Paper Deadline

## Issue #51: Discuss tagging USK - remove tag _usk 18_ from tree?

Deletion of the _usk 18_ tag was unanimously agreed upon.

## Issue #49: Create subtree setting

### Setting

We started by discussing the settings subtree. It previously was divided into three subcategories:

- Topics
- Settings
- Themes

Since we did not yet discuss a clear definition for these terms we tried to approach the terms by talking about examples for settings.
This allowed us to make the first distinctions (with examples):

- place
  - Greece
- time
  - ancient times
  - Post Apokalypse
- fictional
  - otopia
  - dystopia

One example for the setting could we **Post Apokalypse in America** in [Fallout 3](https://store.steampowered.com/app/22300/Fallout_3/).

This already showed, a central problem: Representing all hypothetically possible settings would require us to provide a huge amount of possible tags (for example epochs).
Firstly this would be difficult to achieve, since we would need to predict every possible setting and secondly this would inflate the tree with a lot of tags only used for describing the setting. Consequently we aim to select broader tags such that we avoid overfitting to specific games while others might not be covered at all.
Simultaneously it is important to note, that the tags should not be to broad as for example past, present, future, since this might not give the user a clear understanding what the setting of the game is. Following this we also discussed the use of free text or crawling to describe the setting.
This proposal was rejected directly, since even though it might reduce the tree size this would make input, visualization and interpretation more difficult. For example how would the user be able to see and compare the settings of two games? (This problem does also apply for the USK tags).

To get a feeling for how broad the settings tags would need to be, we defined the goal of these tags: Generally speaking the goal of the settings tags would be to give an impression of the content of the game in regards to the atmosphere or environment.
This could for example indicate which items or persons can be found in the game, how the environment looks like, or maybe what topics or themes might be present in the game.

On that note we further discussed Fallout, since it is a specific setting being in a Post Apocalyptical future while simultaneously containing retro elements and playing an alternate universe.
Here it would be essential to portray the setting well, since it is vital to the style of the game. Additionally this showed the possibility for a divide between how the game feels like (retro past) and when it actually is situated (future).
Furthermore this showed the necessity for a mix and match approach of the tags, allowing to combine at will.

Following this we mentioned further games and example settings:

game   | tags
-------|-----
[Darksiders™](https://store.steampowered.com/app/50620/Darksiders/) | anchient greece + postapokalypse?
[God of War](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1593500/God_of_War/) | mythologies
[The Last of Us™ Part I](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1888930/The_Last_of_Us_Part_I/) | semi future but postapokalypse
[Warhammer 40,000: Space Marine 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/2183900/Warhammer_40000_Space_Marine_2/) | dark fantasy

Besides the concrete meaning of setting still being illusive we found further examples that could be interesting but would need a clear differentiation between terms:

- motife: depression
- what you do: detective work - including accusation, contradiction
- topic: murdermystery
- topic or what you do: border control
- topic?: human rights (is it a topic even though it kind of requires interpretation)

Even though we agreed that the topic and what you do are not necessarily the same thing, it was difficult to keep these apart. When discussing Papers Please it was difficult to define border control as the topic even though it is literally what you are doing.
Similarly for [Return of the Obra Dinn](https://store.steampowered.com/app/653530/Return_of_the_Obra_Dinn/) the question was whether you were actually a detective or whether you are just doing detective work.
Here it was proposed to see the theme or topic as the story from a passiv perspective similar to a book, like "If the game was a book, how would the content look like?"
Building on that we tried to define the abstraction levels of settings, themes and topics.
This resulted in the following components:

- The setting in which the game plays (higher level context)
- The topic around which the story is structured
- The theme, the underlying message

Example: The game is about detective work (topic) in victorian england during a postapokalypse (setting), but the game actually it is about love (theme).
Here it is important to keep in mind, that the wording "The game is about ..." is bad, since this can be used for each tag of any category.

Unfortunately this categorization did not sufficiently divided the different terms, such that we opted for a different approach: Instead of trying to define the terms based on singular examples,
we iterated over a list of games and collected all fitting setting or topic tags that would fit the game (similar to a mindmap). This would yield a big number of related tags, that could be categorized afterwards and refined in the future.

Game | tags
-------|-----
Fighter games | armed conflict?, tournament, competition, gore, duel (to the death)
[Dota 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/570/Dota_2/) | war, armed conflict, competition, fantasy, nature
[The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Special Edition](https://store.steampowered.com/app/489830/The_Elder_Scrolls_V_Skyrim_Special_Edition/) | war, fantasy, medieval, colonialization, independence, seizing power, political conflict, nature, urban, the chosen one?, racism?, ~~adventuring~~, ~~dragon~~
[Mass Effect™ Legendary Edition](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1328670/Mass_Effect_Legendary_Edition/) | science fiction, future, space, space travel, interpersonal relationships, political conflict, non human lifeforms, ai sentience, synthetic life, race?, racism?, race conflicts?, interspecies conflict?, sexism?, mind-control?, brainwashing?, (extinction), (war)
Minecraft | survival, fantasy?, ~~ecosystems~~, nature, monsters?, creatures?, horror?, ~~mining~~, ~~fishing~~, ~~hard labor~~, ~~civilization~~
[Borderlands 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/49520/Borderlands_2/) | aliens, post apocalypse?, space, futuristic?, gore, treasure hunting, ~~space cowboys~~, humor, magic, violence
[Among Us](https://store.steampowered.com/app/945360/Among_Us/) | space, space ship, hard labor, horror, murder mystery, competition
[Left 4 Dead 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/550/Left_4_Dead_2/) | zombies apocalypse, gore, grossness, survival, America, modern times
[The Sims™ 3](https://store.steampowered.com/app/47890/The_Sims_3/) | Family, ~~simulation~~, god?
[Baba Is You](https://store.steampowered.com/app/736260/Baba_Is_You/) | nature, nothing, abstract?
Tetris | nothing, abstract?
[Frostpunkt](https://store.steampowered.com/app/323190/Frostpunk/) | survival, nature, alternate reality

At this point it was already apparent, that some tags might need to be abstracted or merged. This for example was found for tags like war and armed conflict where violent conflict was mentioned as a fitting collecting tag.
Furthermore we again found that it will be difficult to access if a tag is fitting to a game, since it is difficult to define how present or important the game component needs to be for it to be tagged.

Based on these results we closed the discussion to continue it the next time via the mindmap.
The last addition was, that it might be useful to tag the tone, mood or atmosphere of a game in terms of seriousness and humor. This might include: light hearted, dark, humoristic, slapstick.
Due to the complexity of this topic we postponed further discussion, especially since there might be an overlap with _emotional events_ from issue #52.

## Issue #35: Refine subtree organize information

According to issue #35 we discussed the tag _info: hide_ since it was previously found to be unclear and allowing for multiple interpretations.
Including:

- Info: hide self
- Info: keep from players
- Info: keep from NPCs
- Info: hide

Firstly we clarified that the _organize information_ subtree would be targeted at what the player does, therefore directly differentiating from what the player character does. For example when the player is physically organizing information in the game.
Furthermore according to already made propositions we tried to assign these interpretations to new or already present tags.

Regarding _Info: hide self_ the proposition was to add a _stealth mechanics_ tag or tree, that would allow to tag this specific feature (game mechanics).
Following this we discussed whether this might yield sibling trees that should be considered.
This could include _info: keep_ since lying or leaving out information ([Among Us](https://store.steampowered.com/app/945360/Among_Us/), [Keep Talking and Nobody Explodes](https://store.steampowered.com/app/341800/Keep_Talking_and_Nobody_Explodes/)) is a similar feature.
But since this would happen outside of the game these elements can not be considered as a game mechanic.

Regarding _Info: keep from NPCs_ we decided that it would be to narrow in scope and would be covered by _moral and emotional challenges_ or _dialog options_ anyway.

We concluded to start by adding _stealth mechanics_ and considered further options when the situation arises, since possible problems would most likely show themselves in the next tagging phase (for example _combat mechanics_).
Still open is the parent tree of this tag which could either be _problem solving techniques_ or _game mechanics_. Furthermore a differentiation to _skill_ and _strategy_ must be made to clarify whether these mechanics might already be covered else where.

## Issue #25: Rework subtree queue

In our discussions we frequently found, that the tags of the queue tree were irritating and difficult to understand. According to issue #25 we decided to rework the tree.

### Queue game

We began by discussing the two most basic scenarios:

1. The game gives the player a queue that needs to be processed by the player.
2. The player defines a queue in the game that need to be processed for example by NPCs.

Scenario 1 was supposed to be indicated by the _queue game_ tag. Unfortunately we found, that deciding when a game falls into this category was difficult, since ultimately every game gives the player a list or queue of tasks that needs to be processed.
Ultimately making every game a _queue game_, which would be a useless information to tag. Originally originating from games like [Dorfromantik](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1455840/Dorfromantik/) that for example display a representation of a queue in form of a card stack this tag was found to be badly named and misplaced.
Instead we concluded that it might be more promising to add a tag _turnbased_ as part of the mechanics subtree and or a tag _card game_.
The first tag would generally allow to indicate the pacing of a game, while the second one focusses on games that specifically choose to represent a feature in a certain way for example in form of a card stack similar to a skin([Hand of Fate](https://store.steampowered.com/app/266510/Hand_of_Fate/), [Slay the Spire](https://store.steampowered.com/app/646570/Slay_the_Spire/)).
Here it might be interesting to note, that unlike in real life the medium does not have any restrictions that would require the game to present a random queue in form of a card stack and is done purely for aesthetic reasons.

### Player queues subtree

Further discussion of the _player queue_ subtree revealed that the depiction of queues in general might be overfitted since it originally seemed to be highly relevant for the externalization question. Based on this we decided to simplify the tree such that is less difficult to choose the tags.

#### Direct & indirect, parallel & sequential queues

We began by discussing the _direct_ and _indirect_ tag. These are supposed to represent games in which the player can either directly assign tasks to an individual unit ([The Sims™ 3](https://store.steampowered.com/app/47890/The_Sims_3/)) or where the game lists the tasks inside of a queue but assigns the tasks on its own to the NPCs ([Prison Architect](https://store.steampowered.com/app/233450/Prison_Architect/)).
Even though we agreed that there is a difference it was unclear why this features needs to be represented by its own tag. It could be argued that this would clearly differentiate games that use this special approach, but it would still only apply to a few games and might therefore be to detailed.
Following this we found further examples that made the classification more difficult: In [Prison Architect](https://store.steampowered.com/app/233450/Prison_Architect/) the game directly adds the commands to a queue,
but there are also games like Warcraft or [Banished](https://store.steampowered.com/app/242920/Banished/) that allow the player to give a selected group a task like harvest trees - these tasks are also managed by the game and most likely implemented using a queue.
This on the one hand introduces more nuances (like _queue: continuous_) but at the other hand makes it more difficult to access whether it should be tagged as a queue at all since the game might not provide a visual representation of the queue.

This discussion coincides with the _parallel_ and the _sequential_ tag, since they often appear in combination. Here the important differentiation is, that a _parallel_ queue is processed by multiple units while in a _sequential_ queue only one item is processed at a time.

Based on our discussion we decided to remove all these tags in general. Even though the proposition was made to rename the _direct_ and _indirect_ tag to _queue: individual_ & _queue distributed_ it appeared to be easier to remove these tags altogether after a short review of which games where already tagged with these tags.

#### Input buffer

This tag was inspired that provide a very short input queue that main purpose is to allow the player to queue actions in a time critical fighting scenario ([DARK SOULS™: REMASTERED](https://store.steampowered.com/app/570940/DARK_SOULS_REMASTERED/)).
When discussing the specifics of this tag multiple problems where apparent: Firstly this type is queue is usually not visually represented, leading to the player not even knowing that a queue is used. This would also make detection difficult, since this must be recognized to be in a game to be tagged.
Secondly in contrast to a lot of other tags this is a highly implementation specific feature, where it might be difficult to grasp how the queue works or how many elements can be queued.
Even though it can generally be interesting to represent implementation specific features, such that an analyst might get new information of a game, we agreed that this would be out of scope for this subtree and at most a discussion for the future. Therefore leaving this tag to be to specific for the current subtree and leading to its removal from the tree.

#### Realtime

Finally the last tag of this subtree was the _realtime_ tag. It was added for games like [Dota 2](https://store.steampowered.com/app/570/Dota_2/) and opposing to games that pause the game or dilate time to allow the player to queue actions
([Fallout 3](https://store.steampowered.com/app/22300/Fallout_3/), [Mass Effect™ Legendary Edition](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1328670/Mass_Effect_Legendary_Edition/), [Transistor](https://store.steampowered.com/app/237930/Transistor/)).
Similar to the other tags this was agreed upon to be removed. For this tag the argument was mainly that this feature is only relevant as a game mechanic and for the pacing of a game, not for the queue itself.

### Conclusion

We agreed to focus on cleaning up this tree. For this we decided to remove all tags of the queue subtree, such that the tag only indicated whether a game contains a queue or not. We also defined the tag to be only applicable when a game visually represents some player inputs as a queue. Invisible queues will not be tagged via this tag.
Regarding the special cases a follow up discussion might arise naturally in one of the next phases, but for the moment we agreed that it is not necessary to differentiate between them.

Proposed actions:

- Delete _queue game_
- Delete _action queue_
- Delete _direct_, _indirect_
- Delete _parallel_, _sequential_
- Delete _inputbuffer_
- Add _card game_ to _unknown tree_
- Add _turnbased_ to _unknown tree_
- Revisit pause screen or dilate time as a game mechanic
- Revisit special cases later on

### Game table

game   | queue | visually | indirect | direct | parallel | sequential | turn based
-------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----
Transistor | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | | | |
Sims | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | :heavy_multiplication_x: |
Banner saga | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | | | | :heavy_multiplication_x:
project highrise | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | |:heavy_multiplication_x: | |
banished | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | :heavy_multiplication_x: | | |:heavy_multiplication_x: | |
starcraft | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: | :heavy_multiplication_x: |

### Supplement

Following our original discussion we again discussed games that manage the tasks that the players inputs. Especially games like Banished or Starcraft allow the player to assign tasks like harvesting resources, where the tasks itself are managed by the game and assigned to the individual units by the game.
Here the important distinction must be made that these queues are usually not visible to the player. Furthermore this is a highly specific and technical aspect of the game functions.

The currently most important factors for a queue getting tagged as a queue are:

1. visual representation of the queue
2. the player chooses the content of the queue

Other features would need to be represented via a technical aspect subtree, which most likely should not be added at all, since this would be highly speculative anyway. (Example: Internally this game uses queues.)
